I'll get your voice level.
Okay, I'll give you a level.
If we shadows have offended, think that this is always meant to.
That you have put slumber here while these visions did appear.
And this week and I will theme no more yous.
But a dream, gentlemen, do not reprehend if you pardon my old men.
And as I am an honest puck, if I have unearned luck,
not escaped to certain stunts, I will make amends there along.
Else the puck a liar call, and so goodnight unto you all.
Give me your hand if we be friends and Robin shall restore men.
So we can go.
Okay, um, yeah, the tape is rolling, so we're going to go ahead now.
Mr. Paul, you've written of how you grew up with science fiction,
reading the paltz, organizing clubs, editing fanzines and so forth.
Could you recall what it was that attracted you to science fiction so completely at such an early age?
Well, I think it was basically the adventure,
the kind of science fiction that was being published around 1930,
when I first got in touch with it, when I first discovered that it existed,
was mostly space opera and gimmick stories and the stories about exciting, adventurous exploits all over the galaxy.
And that was in the middle of the Great Depression,
and science fiction looked an awful lot better to me than the real world that I could see.
Okay, you're, uh, I believe your first story was published around 1937.
Is that correct around that time?
The first thing I had published was a poem.
It was an amazing story, and I wrote it in 1935, and it was accepted in 1936,
and published in 1937 and paid for in 1938.
So somewhere in there I became a professional writer.
The first story, I think, was probably in 1938.
It was a collaboration with another writer,
and it appeared in a Stoundeg magazine that's now called Analog.
Could you explain just a little bit about what the Futurians were and your part in the organization?
Well, science fiction has some special traits,
and one of them is that its readers herd together as much as they can.
They form fan clubs and associations and correspondents groups and so on.
And in New York City, there were quite a few science fiction fans,
and about 25 or 30, most of whom wanted to be writers, formed a club called the Futurians.
There are people like Cyril Karnblust and Isaac Asimov and Damon Knight, and myself, quite a few others.
Don Walheim, who's now the head of the all books, as an editor,
and no batches of others who really desperately wanted to write science fiction or edit science fiction,
or something like that, and quite a few of them acted out their childhood fantasies and did it.
And I'm not quite sure why the Futurians produced more science fiction writers than most of the other clubs.
It probably has something to do with size.
New York had a bigger pool of talent to draw from.
The Los Angeles group also produced quite a few, including Ray Bradbury and Larry Nivenin, several others.
Did you help each other in your writing? Was it sort of a brotherhood kind of thing? Were you aided each other?
It was partly help and partly one-upmanship, putting each other down.
We did discuss each other's work a lot, and I guess in the process of criticizing it, there was a lot of help given.
I think the biggest factor that made it easier for a lot of us to go on with writing was just the knowledge that other people were doing it,
and also the fact that we collaborated a lot.
We remedied each other's deficiencies by writing, I mean by collaborating on single stories.
And although most of the stories were not very good, we did learn something by seeing how other people would tackle the same subjects we were writing about.
You're uniquely qualified, I think, to comment on science fiction, since you've seen it from so many perspectives as a fan and author and agent and editor and so forth.
You started the editing part of it when you were 19 years old, I think, is that right?
I was lucky enough to fall into a job as a professional magazine editor when I was 19, I had asked.
An editor I knew because I'd been trying to sell him stories about success if he needed an assistant, and he was kind of not to laugh out loud.
I didn't know at the time that not very many science fiction magazine editors could afford assistance,
but he mentioned to me another publishing company that was expanding and suggested I get a touch with them.
So I did, it was popular publication, one of the biggest pulp houses of the time, and they were expanding and they gave me a job at $10 a week to edit two professional science fiction magazines.
$10 wasn't so bad, they hired other editors for nothing at the same time.
And most of the material you got then was the pulp kind of stuff?
It was mostly pulp, but it included a lot of the writers who are the mainstays of the field now.
I published a lot of Isaac Asimov stuff because we were close friends.
A few of Robert A. Heinlein's stories that his primary market, John Campbell for one reason or other, didn't want to print.
And Henry Kutner and a Ivan Vaudt and Cleve Cartmell and Del Sprague De Camp,
and most of the people who were writing at that time wound up in my magazine, not always with their best stories.
In fact, very often with their worst stories, because I wasn't paying very much, I had a budget of about half a cent a word.
And one of the other lines of work that you got into, I remember, was as an advertising copywriter, which brings up to my mind the novel The Space Merchants.
Well, actually The Space Merchants was sort of responsible for it.
When I was in the army, in the Air Force, in World War II, I had some spare time on my hands in Italy, and I decided to write a novel.
And the most interesting subject I could think of was the advertising industry.
So I wrote a whole novel about advertising. Very bad novel.
After the war was over, I took it out and looked at it and realized that it was pretty bad.
And one of its great defects was that I didn't know anything about advertising.
So I went to the New York Sunday Times and looked in the classified section, found a couple of people advertising jobs in advertising,
and applied and got one of them and spent about three years as an advertising copywriter.
During that time, I looked over at this old novel again and realized that it had many more faults and ignorance.
And I burned it, and I had only basic information about advertising and no novel to put it in.
So I thought of writing a science fiction novel, and it turned out to be The Space Merchants.
Cyril Carnblis was a close friend of mine. We'd collaborated before the war, before we both went into service.
And after I had written about a third of it, because the magazine editor wanted it in a hurry,
I asked Cyril if he wanted to help me with it, and he and I collaborated on it.
What was your normal method of collaboration? How did you work out your scenarios for the future?
We didn't work them out in very great detail ahead of time.
Mostly what Cyril and I did was to, let's see, we wrote seven novels and a number of short stories together.
Generally speaking, what we did after the war, after The Space Merchants, and we began writing novels more often than short stories.
Cyril would come out to my house in Red Bank, New Jersey, where we kept the room forum with his own typewriter,
and we'd sit around and talk for a while and discuss general areas we were interested in writing about, maybe some characters.
And then we'd flip a coin, and the loser would go up to the third floor and write the first four pages,
and he'd come down and say, you're on, and the other person would go up and write the next four pages.
And if you do that about 25 or 30 times, you have the rough draft of a complete novel.
Everything got radically rewritten after that because the rough draft was pretty rough, but structurally it was all there.
Going back to The Space Merchants, can you think of any more successful book in the history of science fiction than that one?
Oh, I'm sure there are a lot that are more successful, depending on how you measure it.
Certainly, if the H.G. Wells books were far more successful and far more nerd-node-worthy, and that influenced far more people.
But The Space Merchants hasn't done badly. It's been translated into 45 or so languages and has been continuously in print for, let's see, it's now almost 30 years.
You mentioned that the movie rights had been sold, and there was some sort of a black market tape or something of a dramatic production of it.
Could you talk about that for just a moment?
Well, when the book came out, the Columbia workshop of the air made an adaptation of it. There was very little television at that time, so it was a radio adaptation with a two-part radio play, which someone elicitly dubbed, and tapes are available of it.
I've heard that, unfortunately, they don't pay royalties. And about 10 or 15 years after its publication, a British outfit bought the film rights. They bought them outright, and they paid what struck me at the time as a fantastic amount of money for them.
In fact, they had to get the approval of the Bank of England to transfer that much foreign exchange. But they never made it. I'm not quite sure why. They not only didn't make it, they refused to listen to offers from other producers who wanted to make it, and they just bogged down somewhere in the red tape.
I think there's a chance that it will be made in some form now, because the British outfit has loosened up and is willing to consider offers. But so far, I know of no firm plans.
There's one question I can never avoid asking an author. I'm sure you get these all the time, and I'm not sure how you respond to them. But regarding the ending of the novel, did you intend for that to be optimistic?
They were going to get a new start on Venus, maybe perhaps construct a better society. Was that the intention there, or did you leave it ambiguous?
I left it ambiguous, partly because I wasn't feeling very positive at the time. The novel was written in 1952 in their abouts, which was a pretty grimy period in the history of this country. It was the McCarthy years, and the Cold War years, and things did not look too...
...even as good as they do now, as a matter of fact. So I wasn't feeling optimistic. I didn't mean to foreclose the possibility of a happy ending. Actually, the novel had two endings. There was a different ending in the magazine, there's more upbeat, but less organically related to the rest of the novel.
Many readers, of course, have noticed a very strong social element in your work. You have much to say about United States society and culture and so forth. And I believe you've even been involved in politics. Have you seen yourself in the role of a preacher or a moralist with warnings and science fiction as sort of a pulpit, maybe, or a soapbox sort of a thing to satirize with?
Oh, sure. I think that every writer who really has any interest in what he's doing feels that he has something to say. There's a remark, I don't remember the source of it, that the proper title of every book is really, How to Be More Like Me. And I think that's self, I think that writers are preachers and educators and polemicists and propagandists.
It isn't always political and it isn't always overt, but if it isn't there, the novel doesn't say anything. My own interests have been fairly heavily social and political most of my life. I was active, as you mentioned, in a lot of political things at one time or another.
I even wrote a book called Practical Politics, which is sort of a how to do it manual of how to make the political apparatus work for whatever causes interest to me. But I do not go out of my way to preach. It just, I guess, colors everything I say because a lot of myself, as of every other writer I know, goes into what I'm writing.
Do you think that science fiction has peculiar qualifications to act as a vehicle for social comment?
I think science fiction has special qualifications to act as a vehicle for discussing anything that affects the human being. It's a way of looking at the human race from outside objectively. It's a way of, it's sort of a game playing mechanism for seeing what would happen to human beings under conditions that haven't occurred yet but are very possible.
And I think that that's probably one of the strongest factors accounting for the continual growth and interest in science fiction that seems to have been going on as long as I've been alive.
Okay, in some of your recent works, say, Jim and Man Plus, you describe some bad political systems, I think, where there's a lot of deception, selfish motives, war, I think even in Jim, there was an islation of the earth. Does that concentration on the bad aspects of society come from your view of the world?
No, I'm really Pollyanna. I'm a great optimist about the world. I think that we're in for some terrible times and I don't think that most of us will enjoy much of what happens in the next few years, but I think in the long run the human race will straighten itself out and learn to be able to live better with each other.
But as far as writing a novel is concerned, it's not too interesting to write about a utopian. What are you going to say about a bunch of people who walk around in togas and eat whole wheat bread, never have any bad thoughts?
It's much more interesting to paint the disasters that may occur as a sort of, I think it's King's lameness who calls that kind of science fiction, cautionary literature. It's not saying what will happen, it's just warning what might happen if we don't watch out.
Okay, I'd like to ask the same question about Jim that I did about Space Merchants. The ending of it. I took it as hopefully the part human, part alien society which you envision at the end of the book. I took that as hopeful. Would I be misreading it?
No, I think that it's hopeful. I think that what I was trying to say in Jim was perhaps a little more overt preaching than I usually intend. And I'm not sure that it came across the way I intended it to.
But the subtitle of Jim is the making of a utopia. And what I was trying to say in the novel is that you can't really plan a utopia. You cannot construct a society that will make everybody happy and productive and glad to be alive.
Because the happiness, satisfaction, productivity are not a state, they're a process. And no rigid system can survive giving people maximum opportunities to realize their potential without being flexible and changeable.
Okay, and then in Man Plus, what fascinated me about that book was your examination, the way you did it. You examined machine intelligence. Do you think that's going to be possible? The computers that you envision there linking up and working to survive and sort of taking off?
I think it's an undecided question. I'm not sure which, it's 50-50 chance in my opinion whether machine intelligence can ever develop the sort of independent self-defining goals that human beings can't.
But I don't think it's impossible. It's just that machines have not yet got that smart. What I'm pretty sure of is that machines right now are doing things that 50 years ago one would have described as showing human intelligence.
They solve problems very well. They even do creative things like composing music in any style you like or writing poetry. It's true that the music and the poetry aren't very good, but most human-generated music and poetry is not very good either.
And I think that maybe better programs can be written for machines and they can be more creative. But I think when that happens, people will simply redefine that activity as no longer a symptom of intelligence.
Okay, the cyborg that you mentioned in that book too, do you think Man will be partners with machine in that sort of way too?
It's quite possible. I didn't make up the cyborg. The term and the concept was invented by two Air Force or NASA. I've forgotten which researchers in 1958 or thereabouts. And it's been used widely in a lot of places, but I didn't make it up.
I think that we already see cyborgs in the sense that a lot of people have mechanical parts keeping them alive, pacemakers and artificial plastic veins and arteries and so on. Not to mention things like glass eyes and prosthetic limbs and false teeth and so on.
And I think we also see a sort of intellectual symbiosis like the cyborg in the link-up between human beings and computers. Computers do not solve problems, do not make up problems and solve them, but they make it possible for human beings to do that sort of thing in a fraction of the time it used to take them.
Therefore they make the human beings effectively more intelligent than they were.
Okay, that leads me up to Gateway, which is one of my favorite books. I think you've also written or said that it's one of your favorite novels.
It's a novel that I cared most about. I'm not entirely pleased with anything I've written and I'm very displeased with a lot of what I've written. But Gateway comes as close to being the way I would like it to be, as any novel I've ever written.
Now, I think I noticed this. I'm sure many readers did too. In fact, you've commented on it. There's a departure in style, I think, from your other work. What were the influences that both caused the idea of the book, perhaps, and also the different kind of style you used in it?
Well, one of the big things in Gateway was that I was under no pressure from anyone but myself to do it the way I thought it should be done.
My publisher at that time, the principal publisher, was a man named Ian Valentine who offered me a contract with a substantial advance to write a novel without saying what the novel was going to be and without imposing any deadline on it when I had to deliver it.
So I didn't have to discuss it with an editor ahead of time or write an outline and limit myself to the opportunities I could take. And I didn't have the pressure of getting it delivered at a specific date to make me rush it through.
And actually, it took me, I think, six years from the time I signed the contract until I delivered it. And I had been mulling it over for several years before that. All in all, I think the book was something like ten years in the gestation.
And also, it's not possible for a writer to produce at the same level all the time. I don't know why. There are times when I write better than others. I can't relate them to any outside influence or to my resolution to do well or anything like that.
I just know that sometimes it comes out better than other times. And Gateway, I think, is one of the times that came out very well. I wish I could say the same of all of my books.
Did you say the New Wave was an influence on the way you wrote that book, the so-called New Wave?
The New Wave was an attempt, I guess, fifteen years ago or more of a number of writers to break away from the traditional kinds of science fiction. In fact, most of them didn't want to call it science fiction anymore. They wanted to call it speculative fiction or call it nothing at all.
And they were interested primarily in writing about inner space rather than outer space and, secondarily, a lot of them in things like the drug culture and rock music and so on.
But in the rather bitter internal struggle that went on in science fiction, a lot of people taking sides one way or the other. I think everyone was deeply affected.
And the New Wave, if nothing else, taught a bunch of old dinosaurs like Asimov and Pine Line and me that there were non-traditional ways of constructing a novel.
See, most of us had grown up when science fiction was in the pulp magazines and most of it was written according to some variant of a pulp formula. Well, it turned out that wasn't necessary. And I think the New Wave is responsible for teaching us that.
When you were writing Gateway, when you conceived of the idea during that gestation period, did you intend for there to be a sequel to it at that time?
No, I did not intend for there to be a sequel to it until it was published and people began telling me I ought to write a sequel.
Ah, that's what I was interested in. In other words, were these fans? You responded to fan desires in that respect?
Largely to fan desires and also to my publisher who sat on me and insisted.
I wasn't too hard to convince, but I did not have any such plans. I know that Gateway leaves a lot of questions unanswered and suggests a lot of things that are not made explicit in the novel.
And I did all that on purpose, but not for the sake of preparing the way for a sequel, but just because I think that's the characteristic of a lot of good science fiction.
When you've finished the story, you think of things that let you write your own stories after it. I mean, that's the sort of thing that Arthur Clark does very well.
And I think I try to do it whenever I can. And it just turned out that there was a lot of public pressure to write a sequel.
There's also been public pressure to write another sequel and I'm just about to sign a contract to do that, but I swear I had no such intention when I finished the Un-The-Blue-Event-O-Rise.
That's what I was going to ask you. There were still some questions about the Hishi that were open for exploration and I wondered if you'd considered another novel about them.
I've considered it and just a few weeks ago I used the pressure from my publisher and said I would sign a contract for another book.
I don't plan to go on beyond that. I don't want to do Habbath, Castel, I'll meet the Hishi or Habbath and the Hishi go to Hawaii or whatever.
That's going to be the end of it as far as I'm concerned, but I will write one more.
So many authors are doing trilogies these days. I thought that maybe you'd started out with that idea way back.
No, not me. A lot of them do and I kind of present it because I think mostly it's unfair to the reader to give them part of a story.
I don't think that's true about their gateway or beyond the blue. I think they stand up by themselves.
Okay, I'd like to switch for just a few minutes to some questions about your time as an editor.
I think it was during the 60s you served as the editor of Galaxy in some of its satellite publications.
In probably the best science fiction of a decade went through you in that magazine, the best magazine science fiction.
I was interested in how much influence you had on the authors. You know, your method of encouraging, coaxing, how you worked with them to get the material you did.
What's different with different authors? The thing that I know best about how to be an editor is that you cannot have a general policy and apply it to everybody and hope it will work in every case.
Because writers are very diverse human beings. Some of them respond to long letters of criticism and suggestions and patting on the back or beating over the head.
And some of them do not want any outside influence at all. One of my favorite writers told me early in our relationship that he was willing to have me buy some stories and reject others.
He didn't want to hear why. I sent it back, just sent it back and say, send it back and say no and not tell him what I didn't like about it because I'd upset him.
Other writers wanted to know in great detail, not only what I didn't like but what I did like.
And also there are some writers who are very responsive to money and some to whom money means nothing at all. Not that they are immune to it but they don't want to think in those terms.
And there are some writers who respond to a lot of personal attention and some who really want to be left alone.
And I had to find out something about each writer to find out the best way to deal with them. I can't say I was always successful either.
There are a number of writers that I think I should have been able to get more good material from and didn't. And I just missed the combination in those cases.
An editor in that position, the kind of position you had, I would assume that a lot of stories get published because of the editor's help and whatever kinds of encouragement he gives it would not have been published otherwise.
Quite a few, yeah, especially quite a few stories come to be written because an editor says, listen, you've got a notion here that you are throwing away and you really should expand it.
John Campbell was superb at that sort of thing. Some of the best stories he published were the result of his telling a writer that he had an idea that he didn't realize he had and then getting the writer to write it.
And I tried to do that as much as I could too. But writers do not always know where their ideas come from and do not always know how to deal with outside suggestions.
There's one very good writer who always wanted to comment on suggestions.
I finally decided I shouldn't ever give any to him because the only thing he ever did was not to rewrite a story the way I suggested it, but to throw it away and write a whole new one.
I was never able to get him to rewrite a line. And as a result, there are probably 10 or 15 stories of his that will never be published because he just threw them away.
I think IEF was one of the magazines you worked with when you were with Galaxy.
Galaxy and IEF and a couple of others.
Yeah. Did you get Larry Niven's first story in that IEF magazine?
I published his first story which was a very short one and for which he got a very short paycheck and his next one was a little longer and he got a little more and the next one was quite a lot longer and he got quite a lot more.
Larry said that if it hadn't been for those three events in that order he could not have gone on being a writer.
So I take some pride in the fact that I was instrumental in making it possible for him to devote his time to writing.
Were those first stories, were they the hard science fiction type that he's noted for?
Yes. Larry has always been best at writing hard science fiction.
One or two of them I suggested to him but mostly it was just a matter of encouraging him to do his own thing.
He's the first Hugo he won was the story I'd suggested to him.
Okay. Also you worked at Bannon Books for a while. Do I remember correctly that you were the one who published Delaney's Dahlgren?
Yes indeed. Just after every other publisher in America had turned it down or at least after the half dozen or dozen most likely prospects had turned it down.
I wanted to kind of ask about that. What's your first impression of that was? You had no hesitation in publishing that? Were there any...
No I had a great deal of hesitation. Dahlgren in manuscript was just formidable. It ran to over a thousand pages of type script and any IQ of anyone who's ever lifted the book knows that it's a complicated and difficult book.
But it was also the work of a writer who I consider to be one of the most talented in the field and a writer who considered it to be his best work.
So all my misgivings were overcome by the fact that I had that much trust in Delaney. I didn't really think it would do as well as it did.
I thought it might get through a printing of a hundred thousand copies and rest for a while and then word of mouth would make it a bigger book and actually it took off immediately.
I don't know how many copies it sold. It's over half a million and maybe a million.
Was there much revision you suggested for that book or was it pretty much?
I didn't ask him to do a thing to it. My big concern was to make sure that the type setter set it exactly the way he wrote it.
Yeah. Do you think in those kinds of positions that you had and maybe other editors who worked a few years in the past, can an editor today have as much influence as he could in the past, say you or John Campbell or somebody?
John, thanks. One of the reasons I gave up editing was that it seemed to me to have become less a matter of personal work by one editor and more and more of a committee matter.
There are editors who are very good at what they're doing and do some things far better than I ever could.
But it's a different kind of thing. It's no longer a one-man operation or a one-woman operation.
Now, big business. When I began writing science fiction, even a magazine like Astounding, which was the preeminent thing in the field, was paying to all writers combined over the course of a year, probably less than ten thousand dollars.
And now any novel can expect to get that much. Some of them get ten times that much or even a hundred times that much. So it's got to be quite big business.
Okay. Let me make another little switch here to your work as an agent too. I was interested in the innovation or the way that you paid your authors. Could you explain how that worked?
Well, when I was an agent, it occurred to me that a lot of my writers were, they needed their checks to live on.
Consequently, they were trying to write stories that they thought someone would buy quickly and pay for very well rather than the things that I thought they were really good at.
So I made an arrangement with a number of them, I think about 20 or 25.
They could write anything they wanted to and I would advance them a certain amount per word as soon as I got the manuscript, I wouldn't wait for it to sell.
And as a result, I think that a lot of them were writing pretty well at that time.
Cyril Karnbuth was one of them. Damon Knight was one of them. And Robert Checkley and a few others.
And I think they were just about doing their best work under those conditions.
However, it turned out to be more of a financial burden than I could bear.
Consequently, I managed to lose about $30,000 as an agent.
But I would imagine though that you kept many authors going and we have many books and stories today because of that method.
I think so. I mean, I'm willing to take credit for that because I believe it to be so.
And I do think that it's a very good way to operate, but as far as I know, no other agent has ever done it.
And I'm sure I know why, because it does tend to be a big drain on capital.
And if you don't have a lot of capital, it can't be done.
I was sort of fascinated to read the publishing history the first time it was published, The Book Mission of Gravity by Hal Clement.
If I understand right, you were the agent that sold the book to Campbell?
Yeah. Well, Hal Clement had written the book all by himself.
He was one of the writers who functioned best when left alone.
And all by himself had submitted it to a prize novel contest run by one of the semi-pro publishers of the time.
And it got stuck there and couldn't get loose of it.
So my first big problem was to get it away from them, which took quite a lot of effort.
Second problem was that when I submitted it to Campbell, who was obviously the right person to publish it, he sent it back.
He said, pretty good stuff, but you should know, Fred, that there's a difference between a novel that reads well as a book and a novel that reads well as a serial.
And this one just does not break as a serial.
So I knew he was wrong, and I knew I couldn't argue him out of it.
And so I looked at the manuscript, which was, I think, 270 pages long or something like that.
And I counted up to page 90 and drew a line under a paragraph there.
I counted up to page 180 and drew a line under a paragraph there and had my secretary retype a couple of pages on each side of each line, saying at the bottom the first part, end of part one at the beginning of the second part, beginning of part two.
And I let it sit for a couple of weeks, and I sent it back to John. And he bought it.
I didn't tell him that it had been rewritten, which it had. I just sent it back, and he bought it and published it, and it turned out to be very nearly the most popular serial analog ever, astounding or analog whatever it was at the time it would run.
One of the things that I'm convinced of about being an agent is that you shouldn't let editors make mistakes.
If they reject something they really should buy, you should find some way of getting them to reverse themselves.
Well, that might have been a close call. Do you think that book would have had trouble being published?
Not a bit. It certainly would have been published somewhere else. But the right place for it, I thought, was astounding, because it was the Prestige magazine at the time.
Okay. I believe I read also. Were you Isaac Asimov's agent at one time?
Yes, I was.
And what sort of helped him from the transition from the magazines to book publication?
Yes, I persuaded him to think in terms of writing books. And it wasn't easy because Isaac was quite convinced that he wasn't a book writer.
And the particular manuscript that I wanted to sell as a book he didn't like very much. He'd written it for magazine as a short novel, and they had turned it down very ungraciously, and he'd lost confidence in it.
It came out in book form as Pebble in the Sky. So I practically had to have a fist fight with him to get the manuscript away from him.
And I did suggest to him, too, that he might consider writing nonfiction as well as fiction, since there was a much more reliable market at that time, I guess still is, or nonfiction.
Although by the time he actually began taking that advice, I had stopped being an agent.
Okay, these questions I've been asking about as an agent, as an editor and so forth. Just to end it, could I ask you, are there any particular discoveries or influences that you're particularly proud of, say, things that you've had some influence in that you remember were certain kind of fondness or so forth?
Most of the things we've talked about, I remember with some fondness, you've been very kind and only mentioning the things that I'm rather pleased about.
I also had a great many failures and places where I know I should have done better and was not witty enough to perceive it at the time.
But as an agent, I think I did manage to get a number of writers on a track that would have taken a little more time to discover by themselves.
As an editor, I feel that I did give a good many writers either their first publication or their most visible publication. I take pleasure in that.
Outside of that, I think it's pure treachery. The only really pleasurable thing about it is finding something and printing it and giving it to an audience that might otherwise either never have existed or never have gotten to print.
Okay, very few people probably would be as qualified to answer this kind of the next question I have than you would be.
Regarding the publishing and the marketing of science fiction, we've talked to some authors, particularly Norman Spenrad, who think that the publishing industry is set up to keep science fiction separate, that it should remain separate,
and that perhaps keeps it sort of second class in a lot of readers' eyes where it should be allowed to join the mainstream and so forth.
Is the publishing industry responsible for that kind of thing, or do you think science fiction should be brought into the so-called mainstream of literature?
Well, the publishing industry is responsible for that, and in some ways it's a bad thing. A lot of people in this world like to read books, but are prejudiced against anything that has the word science fiction on it.
I think it's, I've forgotten the person who wrote the poem, this little poem about it, which says something like, if it's science fiction, I don't like it, and if I like it, it can't possibly be science fiction,
because there are a great many science fiction novels that everybody loves. They just don't admit they're science fiction. The Brave New World in 1984, and so on.
But I don't mind that. I'm perfectly willing to have the word science fiction on the cover of any book I write. It's only a sort of geographical designation.
It's the name they put on the shelves where the books appear that the people who like to write, read my books, are going to go.
And it does not describe the field. It's not a very good name, but it's sort of like a Roman standard. It's a rallying point. It's where you find a cluster of things that you like.
Norman Spinnerut, I know, feels very badly about it, and so does Harlan Ellison and so does several others, but I don't share their particular hang-ups.
Okay, in respect to that business about science fiction being separate, I think you said the words to this effect that science fiction is a special taste.
I suppose that means there's a special sort of person that would appreciate it or tend to read it.
Well, I think that science fiction makes more demands on the reader than most kinds of writing. You have to be willing to stretch your imagination.
You have to be willing to follow what is sometimes a pretty complex argument, and it's helpful if you know something about the real world.
Not just how to go to the A&P, but what the basic constraints of physical science are and what the societies, how societies work.
And not too many people are willing to put in that much effort, but there's an awful lot of science fiction that requires no effort at all, and that's often the kinds that are most popular.
Star Trek, for example, requires very little effort from anybody, and of course has been very successful.
You also have a reputation as a futurist. Wouldn't you think that science fiction would have a great value, say, for the majority of the reading public in preparing people for the future and so forth?
Well, I think so. I think anybody who reads science fiction is very likely to be overcome by a future shock.
Well, when the atomic bomb fell on Hiroshima, there were only about 10,000 people in the world who understood what had happened.
About 500 nuclear physicists and the rest were all science fiction fans, and I think the same has been true about the space program and about many of the social developments in the last 20 or 30 years.
And I think that if you read enough science fiction, you begin to get a spectrum of the possible futures that lie ahead for all of us.
I think it's quite useful in the sense that it lets you make decisions now about which ones of them you would like to avoid or which ones you would like to avert, and it helps you find ways of taking actions now that will encourage the good ones and discourage the bad ones.
But it's not just that. I think science fiction also has a good deal of entertainment of what is to me an extremely pleasurable kind to offer.
All right. You've written a great deal in your memoirs, The Way the Future Was, really about the history of science fiction from your perspective.
From your vantage point, is science fiction today very different than it was back in the 30s and so forth when you got so involved with it? Have there been really huge changes?
Science fiction today is not only very different from what it was in the 30s, it's very different from other kinds of science fiction today.
One of the things that attracts me to science fiction is that there are so many different kinds of it. There are books like the one we mentioned before, Dolgren, which are not a bit like the ones by Doc Smith, Skylark stories, or the Lenten stories, which are not a bit like the ones by Erstel Le Guin, which are not a bit like the ones by Larry Niven, for example.
And I think that science fiction is characterized by variety. There are very few general statements you can make about science fiction. It isn't fiction about science, it isn't fiction about the future, it isn't fiction about space travel.
It's fiction which has to do more than anything else with change. Somebody asked Arthur Clarke once why he wrote science fiction, and he said something like, because it's the only literature that concerns itself with reality.
And if you take that reality to be the reality of change, the big one that confronts is all, then science fiction is it. The rest of literature deals with what is or what has been science fiction deals with change.